SDMX Standards: Section 3A PaRT VII

SDMX-ML:

Schema and Documentation

Samples

Version 2.1

April 2011

Â© SDMX 2011

http://www.sdmx.org/

Contents
========

`1 Introduction 1 <#introduction>`__

`2 Structure Samples 1 <#structure-samples>`__

`3 Data Samples 2 <#data-samples>`__

`4 Metadata Sample 3 <#metadata-sample>`__

`5 Query Samples 3 <#query-samples>`__

Introduction
============

This document provides a brief overview of the currently available set
of sample files. It is intended that more samples will be added over
time, and the explanations in this document updated. Eventually, this
entire document will be migrated to a complete user guide which details
the various aspects of SDMX, focusing on specific use cases and
beginning to end uses of the standard.

Structure Samples
=================

The structure samples that are available serve to describe the structure
of the data and reference metadata samples.

The directory common contains structural metadata based on the content
oriented guidelines, and this is used across all samples.

For all samples, there is a common sample file which contains a subset
of standard SDMX components. Tese are contained in common/common.xml.
Other files may make external references to this file.

The directory exr contains 3 similar data structure definitions, each
with very slight modifications. These data structures are all based on
the ECB exchange rates and serve to demonstrate that the newly
introduced attribute relationship construct. A summary of the files is
as follows:

-  exr/common/exr_common.xml: this contains the structural metadata that
   is used across the various data structures. Each of the subsequent
   structure message provide external references to this file

-  exr/ecb_exr_ng/ecb_exr_ng.xml: this contains an exchange rate data
   structure with no groups defined. All attribute relationships are to
   specific dimensions. The file ecb_exr_ng_full.xml represents the same
   structure, but does not use external referencing to make the file
   easier to load into tools which cannot resolve local file references

-  exr/ecb_exr_sg/ ecb_exr_sg.xml: this contains an exchange rate data
   structure with a sibling group defined. In this sample, only on
   attribute references the sibling group, and the rest maintain the
   relationships defined in the data structure without groups. The file
   ecb_exr_sg_full.xml represents the same structure, but does not use
   external referencing to make the file easier to load into tools which
   cannot resolve local file references

-  exr/ecb_exr_rg/ ecb_exr_rg.xml: this contains an exchange rate data
   structure with an addition group defined. In this sample only one
   attribute specifies a relationship with the new group, but the
   dimensions from the previous sample now declare the sibling group as
   an attachment group. The file ecb_exr_rg_full.xml represents the same
   structure, but does not use external referencing to make the file
   easier to load into tools which cannot resolve local file references

The directory demography contains a data structure and metadata
structure. The summary of the structural metadata files are as follows:

-  demography.xml: this contains the demography data structure
   definition. This data structure definition declares measure
   dimension. It is also worth noting that the measure concepts have
   different core representations. This is important when the sample
   data is discussed.

-  esms.xml: this contains a much simplified variation of the Eurostat
   SDMX Metadata Structure. It feature all of the new features of the
   metadata structure including the various target objects, the ability
   to reference multiple possible targets from a report structure and
   the ability to have more complex structures with repeating
   attributes, attributes with both sub content and values, and
   attributes with structured text as it content

Data Samples
============

The exchange rate sample data files all contains the same set of data,
and each variation of the key family has 8 corresponding sample files
intended to demonstrate the effects of the various orientations. The
difference in the data structures is discussed in the previous section.
For any given data structure, the following samples files exist (note
the names vary based on the data structure used and the format, but
follow the same structure (note [format] is generic or structured and
[dsd] is ecb_exr_ng, ecb_exr_sg, or ecb_exr_rg.:

-  [format]/[dsd]_flat.xml: this represents ungrouped observations,
   where every observation contains a full key. It is worth noting how
   the use of groups changes change the verbosity of the message

-  [format]/[ [dsd]_ts.xml: this represents the data organised as time
   series, using the time series only message

-  [format]/[dsd]_ts.xml: this represents the same orientation as the
   previous file, but uses the general format. It is worth noting that
   this file is exactly that same as the previous file with the
   exception of the root element

-  [format]/[ [dsd]_xs.xml: this file shows the data represented with
   another dimension at the observation level. Because of the attribute
   relationships, this results in the duplication of values. But as the
   data structures introduce groups, this impact is reduced

Note that for all structured data, the data structure specific schemas
have same file name, but with a .xsd extension.

The demography data has only on instance associated with it, and that is
a cross sectional format with explicit measures being used. It is
important to examine the data structure definition schema
(demography_xs_ex.xsd) to note how the various measure have different
representations for the observed value (OBS_VALUE). By modifying the
sample, you can see where this provides extra validation.

Metadata Sample
===============

There is a single set of reference metadata samples based on the ESMS
metadata structure in the demography folder. This is meant to represent
a very simplified metadata report that is attached to the demography
data via a category in which the data flow is defined. These files are:

-  esms_generic.xml: this the reference metadata in the generic format

-  esms_structured.xml: this is the same data in the metadata structure
   specific format (note that esms.xsd is the schema for this)

By comparing the files, you can see the similarities between the two
formats. In fact, the only difference you will notice (outside of the
namespace) is that the metadata structure specific format has element
names based on the metadata attribute identifiers where as the generic
structure has this information in a ReportedAttribute element.

An examination of the metadata structure specific schema will help in
understanding the rules for creating these schemas, as the schema is
annotated with comments explaining the various features. It is also
worth noticing how the representation scheme for the target object which
references a category resulted in a reference which only allows the
categories from that scheme to be referenced.

Note that the xhtml folder contains the xhtml schemas so that the
structure text content can be validated.

Query Samples
=============

The query directory contains a set of query and response documents that
highlight some of the new features in the query. Each query is paired
with it response by the file name (e.g. query_esms.xml is the query and
response.esms.xml is the response). The purpose of the queries is as
follows:

-  query_demo_stub.xml: this is a simple query which demonstrates how
   one can check for the existence of an object by simply requesting
   that no references be resolved and only the stub be returned. The
   intention of this query is to simply find out what is the version of
   the currently active demography data structure.

-  query_esms_shallow.xml: this is a query for the ESMS metadata
   structure, which is returned in full detail. Only the object
   referenced directly from the metadata structure are requested and
   returned, and only the stubs of the objects.

-  query_esms_deep.xml: this is an example of a where used query. The
   intention is to query for any objects which are used directly or
   indirectly by the ESMS metadata structure. You will notice that the
   metadata structure is requested to not be returned. Instead, only the
   stubs of all objects referenced form the metadata structure and the
   object which they reference (and so on) are returned.

-  query_cl_all.xml: this a query for a subset of the very large area
   codelist. Notices that the return details specify that the matched
   item should be cascaded down the hierarchy, meaning all of its child
   codes should be returned. In this example, this results in all
   regions and sub-regions for Greece.

-  query_cl_regions.xml: this is query for only the regions that are
   direct children of Greece. The query uses the parent property of the
   code to find the administrative regions within the country. Notice
   that the results are not cascaded, so only one level is returned.
