Framework for SDMX Technical Standards
++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++

Introduction
============

The Statistical Data and Metadata Exchange (SDMX) initiative
(http://www.sdmx.org) sets standards that can facilitate the exchange of
statistical data and metadata using modern information technology, with
an emphasis on aggregated data.

There are several sections to the SDMX Technical Specification:

1. SDMX Framework Document – this document. The purpose of this document
   is to introduce SDMX and its scope. This document will be revised in
   due course to include the conformance requirements.

2. The SDMX Information Model - the information model on which
   syntax-specific implementations described in the other sections are
   based. This is intended for technicians wishing to understand the
   complete scope of the technical standards in a syntax-neutral form.
   It includes as an annex a tutorial on UML (Unified Modelling
   Language). This document is not normative.

3. SDMX-EDI - the UN/EDIFACT format for exchange of SDMX-structured data
   and metadata. This document contains normative sections describing
   the use of the UN/EDIFACT syntax in SDMX messages. This document has
   normative sections.

4. SDMX-ML - the XML format for the exchange of SDMX-structured data and
   metadata. This document has normative sections describing the use of
   the XML syntax in SDMX messages, and is accompanied by a set of
   normative XML schemas and non-normative sample XML document
   instances.

5. The SDMX Registry Specification provides for a central registry of
   information about available data and reference metadata, and for a
   repository containing structural metadata and provisioning
   information. This specification defines the basic services offered by
   the SDMX Registry: registration of data and metadata; querying for
   data and metadata; and subscription/notification regarding updates to
   the registry. This document has normative sections.

6. The SDMX Technical Notes – this is a guide to help those who wish to
   use the SDMX specifications. It includes notes on the expressive
   differences of the various messages and syntaxes; versioning;
   maintenance agencies; the SDMX Registry. This document is not
   normative.

7. Web Services Guidelines – this is a guide for those who wish to
   implement SDMX using web-services technologies. It places an emphasis
   on those aspects of web-services technologies (including, but not
   requiring, an SDMX-conformant registry) which will work regardless of
   the development environment or platform used to create the web
   services. This document contains normative sections.

Changes from Previous Version
=============================

The 2.0 version of this standard represented a significant increase in
scope, and also provided more complete support in those areas covered in
the version 1.0 specification. Version 2.0 of this standard is
backward-compatible with version 1.0, so that existing implementations
can be easily migrated to conformance with version 2.0.

The 2.1 version of this standard represents a set of changes resulting
from several years of implementation experience with the 2.0 standard.
The changes do not represent a major increase in scope or functionality,
but do correct some bugs, and add functionalities in some cases. Major
changes in SDMX-ML include a much stronger alignment of the XML Schemas
with the Information Model, to emphasize inheritance and object-oriented
features, and increased precision and flexibility in the attachment of
metadata reports to specific objects in the SDMX Information Model.

   Note that the idea of backward-compatibility in the standards is
   based on the information model. In both releases, some
   non-backward-compatible changes have been made to the SDMX-ML
   formats. The same set of information required to use version 1.0 of
   the specification will permit the use of the same features in the
   version 2.0 specifications, however. Thus, a Data Structure
   Definition is easily translated from version 1.0 to version 2.0,
   without requiring any new information regarding structures, etc.
   There have been no changes to the SDMX-EDI format.

The major changes from 1.0 to 2.0 can be briefly summarized:

-  **Reference Metadata**: In addition to describing and specifying data
   structures and formats (along with related structural metadata), the
   version 2.0 specification also provides for the exchange of metadata
   which is distinct from the structural metadata in the 1.0 version.
   This category includes "reference" metadata (regarding data quality,
   methodology, and similar types – it can be configured by the user to
   include whatever concepts require reporting); metadata related to
   data provisioning (release calendar information, description of the
   data and metadata provided, etc.); and metadata relevant to the
   exchange of categorization schemes.

-  **SDMX Registry**: Provision is made in the 2.0 standard for standard
   communication with registry services, to support a data-sharing model
   of statistical exchange. These services include registration of data
   and metadata, querying of registered data and metadata, and
   subscription/notification.

-  **Structural Metadata**: The support for exchange of statistical data
   and related structural metadata has been expanded. Some support is
   provided for qualitative data; data cube structures are described;
   hierarchical code lists are supported; relationships between data
   structures can be expressed, providing support for extensibility of
   data structures; and the description of functional dependencies
   within cubes are supported.

The major changes from 2.0 to 2.1 can be briefly summarized:

-  **Web-Services-Oriented Changes:** Several organizations have been
   implementing web services applications using SDMX, and these
   implementations have resulted in several changes to the
   specifications. Because the nature of SDMX web services could not be
   anticipated at the time of the original drafting of the
   specifications, the web services guidelines have been completely
   re-developed.

-  **Presentational Changes:** Much work has gone into using various
   technologies for the visualization of SDMX data and metadata, and
   some changes have been proposed as a result, to better leverage this
   graphical visualization. These changes are largely to leverage the
   Cross-domain Concepts of the Content Oriented Guidelines.

-  **Consistency Issues:** There have been some areas where the draft
   specifications were inconsistent in minor ways, and these have been
   addressed.

-  **Clarifications in Documentation:** In some cases it has been
   identified that the documentation of specific fields within the
   standard needed clarification and elaboration, and these issues have
   been addressed.

-  **Optimization for XML Technologies:** Implementation has shown that
   it is possible to better organize the XML schemas for use within
   common technology development tools which work with XML. These
   changes are primarily focused on leveraging the object-oriented
   features of W3C XML Schema to allow for easier processing of SDMX
   data and metadata.

-  **Consistency between the SDMX-ML and the SDMX Information Model:**
   Certain aspects of the XML schemas and UML model have been more
   closely aligned, to allow for easier comprehension of the SDMX model.

-  **Technical Bugs:** Some minor technical bugs have been identified in
   the registry interfaces and elsewhere. These bugs have been
   addressed.

-  **Support for Non-Time-Series Data in the Generic Format:** One area
   which has been extended is the ability to express non-time-series
   data as part of the generic data message.

-  **Simplification of the data structure definition - specific message
   types:** Both time series (version 2.0 Compact) and non-time series
   data sets (version 2.0 Cross Sectional) use the same underlying
   structure for a structure-specific formatted message, which is
   specific to the Data Structure Definition of the data set.

-  **Simplification and better support for the metadata structure:** New
   use cases have been reported and these are now supported by a
   re-modelled metadata structure definition.

-  **Support for partial item schemes such as a code list:** The concept
   of a partial (sub-set) item scheme such as a partial code list for
   use in exchange scenarios has been introduced\ **.**

Processes and Business Scope
============================

Process Patterns
----------------

SDMX identifies three basic process patterns regarding the exchange of
statistical data and metadata. These can be described as follows:

1. *Bilateral exchange:* All aspects of the exchange process are agreed
   between counterparties, including the mechanism for exchange of data
   and metadata, the formats, the frequency or schedule, and the mode
   used for communications regarding the exchange. This is perhaps the
   most common process pattern.

2. *Gateway exchange:* Gateway exchanges are an organized set of
   bilateral exchanges, in which several data and metadata collecting
   organizations or individuals agree to exchange the collected
   information with each other in a single, known format, and according
   to a single, known process. This pattern has the effect of reducing
   the burden of managing multiple bilateral exchanges (in data and
   metadata collection) across the sharing organizations/individuals.
   This is also a very common process pattern in the statistical area,
   where communities of institutions agree on ways to gain efficiencies
   within the scope of their collective responsibilities.

3. *Data-sharing exchange:* Open, freely available data formats and
   process patterns are known and standard. Thus, any organization or
   individual can use any counterparty’s data and metadata (assuming
   they are permitted access to it). This model requires no bilateral
   agreement, but only requires that data and metadata providers and
   consumers adhere to the standards.

This document specifies the SDMX standards designed to facilitate
exchanges based on any of these process patterns, and shows how SDMX
offers advantages in all cases. It is possible to agree bilaterally to
use a standard format (such as SDMX-EDI or SDMX-ML); it is possible for
data senders in a gateway process to use a standard format for data
exchange with each other, or with any data providers who agree to do so;
it is possible to agree to use the full set of SDMX standards to support
a common data-sharing process of exchange, whether based on an
SDMX-conformant registry or some other architecture.

The standards specified here specifically support a data-sharing process
based on the use of central registry services. Registry services provide
visibility into the data and metadata existing within the community, and
support the access and use of this data and metadata by providing a set
of triggers for automated processing. The data or metadata itself is not
stored in a central registry – these services merely provide a useful
set of metadata about the data (and additional metadata) in a known
location, so that users/applications can easily locate and obtain
whatever data and/or metadata is registered. The use of standards for
all data, metadata, and the registry services themselves is ubiquitous,
permitting a high level of automation within a data-sharing community.

It should be pointed out that these different process models are not
mutually exclusive – a single system capable of expressing data and
metadata in SDMX-conformant formats could support all three scenarios.
Different standards may be applicable to different processes (for
example, many registry services interfaces are used only in a
data-sharing scenario) but all have a common basis in a shared
information model.

In addition to looking at collection and reporting, it is also important
to consider the dissemination of data. Data and metadata – no matter how
they are exchanged between counterparties in the process of their
development and creation – are all eventually supplied to an end user of
some type. Often, this is through specific applications inside of
institutions. But more and more frequently, data and metadata are also
published on websites in various formats. The dissemination of data and
its accompanying metadata on the web is a focus of the SDMX standards.
Standards for statistical data and metadata allow improvements in the
publication of data – it becomes more easily possible to process a
standard format once the data is obtained, and the data and metadata are
linked together, making the comprehension and further processing of the
data easier.

In discussions of statistical data, there are many aspects of its
dissemination which impact data quality: data discovery, ease of use,
and timeliness. SDMX standards provide support for all of these aspects
of data dissemination. Standard data formats promote ease of use, and
provide links to relevant metadata. The concept of registry services
means that data and metadata can more easily be discovered. Timeliness
is improved throughout the data lifecycle by increases in efficiency,
promoted through the availability of metadata and ease of use.

It is important to note that SDMX is primarily focused on the *exchange*
and *dissemination* of statistical data and metadata. There may also be
many uses for the standard model and formats specified here in the
context of internal processing of data that are not concerned with the
exchange between organizations and users, however. It is felt that a
clear, standard formatting of data and metadata for the purposes of
exchange and dissemination can also facilitate internal processing by
organizations and users, but this is not the focus of the specification.

SDMX and Process Automation
---------------------------

Statistical data and metadata exchanges employ many different automated
processes, but some are of more general interest than others. There are
some common information technologies that are nearly ubiquitous within
information systems today. SDMX aims to provide standards that are most
useful for these automated processes and technologies.

Briefly, these can be described as:

1. *Batch Exchange of Data and Metadata:* The transmission of whole or
   partial databases between counterparties, including incremental
   updating.

2. *Provision of Data and Metadata on the Internet:* Internet technology
   - including its use in private or semi-private TCP/IP networks - is
   extremely common. This technology includes XML and web services as
   primary mechanisms for automating data and metadata provision, as
   well as the more traditional static HTML and database-driven
   publishing.

3. *Generic Processes:* While many applications and processes are
   specific to some set of data and metadata, other types of automated
   services and processes are designed to handle any type of statistical
   data and metadata whatsoever. This is particularly true in cases
   where portal sites and data feeds are made available on the Internet.

4. *Presentation and Transformation of Data:* In order to make data and
   metadata useful to consumers, they must support automated processes
   that transform them into application-specific processing formats,
   other standard formats, and presentational formats. Although not
   strictly an aspect of exchange, this type of automated processing
   represents a set of requirements that must be supported if the
   information exchange between counterparties is itself to be
   supported.

The SDMX standards specified here are designed to support the
requirements of all of these automation processes and technologies.

Statistical Data and Metadata
-----------------------------

To avoid confusion about which "data" and "metadata" are the intended
content of the SDMX formats specified here, a statement of scope is
offered. Statistical "data" are sets of often numeric observations which
typically have time associated with them. They are associated with a set
of metadata values, representing specific concepts, which act as
identifiers and descriptors of the data. These metadata values and
concepts can be understood as the named dimensions of a
multi-dimensional co-ordinate system, describing what is often called a
"cube" of data.

SDMX identifies a standard technique for modelling, expressing, and
understanding the structure of this multi-dimensional "cube", allowing
automated processing of data from a variety of sources. This approach is
widely applicable across types of data and attempts to provide the
simplest and most easily comprehensible technique that will support the
exchange of this broad set of data and related metadata.

The term "metadata" is very broad indeed. A distinction can be made
between "structural" metadata – those concepts used in the description
and identification of statistical data and metadata – and "reference"
metadata – the larger set of concepts that describe and qualify
statistical data sets and processing more generally, and which are often
associated not with specific observations or series of data, but with
entire collections of data or even the institutions which provide that
data.

The SDMX Information Model provides for the structuring not only of
data, but also of "reference" metadata. While these reference metadata
structures exist independent of the data and its structural metadata,
they are often linked. The SDMX Information Model provides for the
attachment of reference metadata to any part of the data or structural
metadata, as well as for the reporting and exchange of the reference
metadata and its structural descriptions. This function of the SDMX
standards supports many aspects of data quality initiatives, allowing as
it does for the exchange of metadata in its broadest sense, of which
quality-related metadata is a major part.

Metadata are associated not only with data, but also with the process of
providing and managing the flow of data. The SDMX Information Model
provides for a set of metadata concerned with "data provisioning" –
metadata which are useful to those who need to understand the content
and form of a data provider’s output. Each data provider can describe in
standard fashion the content of and dependencies within the data and
metadata sets which they produce, and supply information about the
scheduling and mechanism by which their data and metadata are provided.
This allows for automation of some validation and control functions, as
well as supporting management of data reporting.

SDMX also recognizes the importance of classification schemes in
organizing and managing the exchange and dissemination of data and
metadata. It is possible to express information about classification
schemes and domain categories in SDMX, along with their relationships to
data and metadata sets, as well as to categorize other objects in the
model.

The SDMX standards offer a common model, a choice of syntax and, for
XML, a choice of data formats which support the exchange of any type of
statistical data meeting the definition above; several optimized formats
are specified based on the specific requirements of each implementation,
as described below in the SDMX-ML section.

The formal objects in the information model are presented briefly below in :numref:`image0`,
but are also discussed in more detail elsewhere in this specification.

.. _image0: 
.. figure:: /_static/media-SDMX_2-1_SECTION_1_Framework/media/image2.png
    :alt: High Level Schematic of Major Artefacts in the SDMX Information Model
    :width: 100%
    :align: center
    
    High Level Schematic of Major Artefacts in the SDMX Information Model

The SDMX View of Statistical Exchange
-------------------------------------

Version 1.0 of ISO/TS 17369 SDMX covered statistical data sets and the
metadata related to the structure of these data sets. This scope was
useful in supporting the different models of statistical exchange
(bilateral exchange, gateway exchange, and data-sharing) but was not by
itself sufficient to support them completely. Versions 2.0 and 2.1
provide a much more complete view of statistical exchange, so that an
open data-sharing model can be fully supported, and other models of
exchange can be more completely automated. In order to produce technical
standards that will support this increased scope, the SDMX Information
Model provides a broader set of formal objects which describe the
actors, processes, and resources within statistical exchanges.

It is important to understand the set of formal objects not only in a
technical sense, but also in terms of what they represent in the
real-world exchange of statistical data and metadata.

The first version of SDMX provided for data sets - specific statistical
data reported according to a specific structure, for a specific time
range - and for data structure definitions - the metadata which
describes the structure of statistical data sets. These are important
objects in statistical exchanges, and are retained and enhanced in the
second version of the standards in a backward-compatible form. A related
object in statistical exchanges is the "data flow" - this supports the
concept of data reporting or dissemination on an ongoing basis. "Data
flows" can be understood as data sets which are not bounded by time.
Data structures are owned and maintained by agencies - in a similar
fashion, data flows are owned by maintenance agencies.

Versions 2.0 and 2.1 – like version 1.0 – allow for the publication of
statistical data (and the related structural metadata) but also provide
for the standard, systematic representation of reference metadata.
Reference metadata are reported not as an integral part of a data set,
but independent of the statistical data. SDMX provides for reference
"metadata sets", "metadata structure definitions", and "metadata flows".
These objects are very similar to data sets, data structure definitions,
and data flows, but they concern reference metadata rather than
statistical observations. In the same way that data providers may
publish statistical data, they may also publish reference metadata.
Metadata structural definitions are maintained by agencies in a fashion
similar to the way that agencies maintain data structure definitions,
the structural definitions of data sets.

The structural definitions of both data and reference metadata associate
specific statistical concepts with their representations, whether
textual, coded, etc. In SDMX version 2.0/2.1, these concepts are taken
from a "concept scheme" which is maintained by a specific agency.
Concept schemes group a set of concepts, provide their definitions and
names, and allow for semantic relationships to be expressed, when some
concepts are specializations of others. It is possible for a single
concept scheme to be used both for data structures - key families - and
for reference metadata structures.

Inherent in any statistical exchange – and in many dissemination
activities - is a concept of "service level agreement", even if this is
not formalized or made explicit. SDMX incorporates this idea in objects
termed "provision agreements". Data providers may provide data to many
different data flows. Data flows may incorporate data coming from more
than one data provider. Provision agreements are the objects which tell
you which data providers are supplying what data to which data flows.
The same is true for metadata flows.

Provision agreements allow for a variety of information to be made
available: the schedule by which statistical data or metadata is
reported or published, the specific topics about which data or metadata
is reported within the theoretically possible set of data (as described
by a data structure definition or reference metadata structure
definition), and the time period covered by the statistical data and
metadata. This set of information is termed "constraint" in the SDMX
Information Model.

A brief summary of the objects described in the information model
includes:

-  **Data Set:** Data is organized into discrete sets, which include
   particular observations for a specific period of time. A data set can
   be understood as a collection of similar data, sharing a structure,
   which covers a fixed period of time.

-  **Data Structure Definition (DSD, also known as Key Family in Version
   2.0):** Each data set has a set of structural metadata. These
   descriptions are referred to in SDMX as Data Structure Definitions,
   which include information about how concepts are associated with the
   measures, dimensions, and attributes of a data "cube," along with
   information about the representation of data and related identifying
   and descriptive (structural) metadata. In Version 2.1, the term "Key
   Family" is replaced by "Data Structure Definition" (DSD) both in XML
   Schemas and the Information Model.

-  **Code list:** Code lists enumerate a set of values to be used in the
   representation of dimensions, attributes, and other structural parts
   of SDMX. They can be supplemented by other structural metadata which
   indicates how codes are organized into hierarchies.

-  **Organisation Scheme:** Organisations and organisation structure can
   be defined in an Organisation Scheme. Specific Organisation Schemes
   exist for Maintenance Agency, Data Provider, Data Consumer, and
   Organisation Unit.

-  **Category Scheme and Categorisation:** Category schemes are made up
   of a hierarchy of categories, which in SDMX may include any type of
   useful classification for the organization of data and metadata. A
   Categorisation links a category to an identifiable object. In this
   way sets of objects can be categorised. A statistical subject-matter
   domain scheme is implemented in SDMX as a Category Scheme.

-  **Concept Scheme:** A concept scheme is a maintained list of concepts
   that are used in data structure definitions and metadata structure
   definitions. There can be many such concept schemes. A "core"
   representation of the concept can be specified (e.g. a core code
   list, or other representation such as "date"). Note that this core
   representation can be overridden in the data structure definition or
   metadata structure definition that uses the concept. Indeed,
   organisations wishing to remain with version 1.0 key family schema
   specifications will continue to declare the representation in the key
   family definition.

-  **Metadata Set:** A reference metadata set is a set of information
   pertaining to an object within the formal SDMX view of statistical
   exchange: they may describe the maintainers of data or structural
   definitions; they may describe the schedule on which data is
   released; they may describe the flow of a single type of data over
   time; they may describe the quality of data, etc. In SDMX, the
   creators of reference metadata may take whatever concepts they are
   concerned with, or obliged to report, and provide a reference
   metadata set containing that information.

-  **Metadata Structure Definition:** A reference metadata set also has
   a set of structural metadata which describes how it is organized.
   This metadata set identifies what reference metadata concepts are
   being reported, how these concepts relate to each other (typically as
   hierarchies), what their presentational structure is, how they may be
   represented (as free text, as coded values, etc.), and with which
   formal SDMX object types they are associated.

-  **Dataflow Definition:** In SDMX, data sets are reported or
   disseminated according to a data flow definition. The data flow
   definition identifies the data structure definition and may be
   associated with one or more subject matter domains via a
   Categorisation (this facilitates the search for data according to
   organised category schemes). Constraints, in terms of reporting
   periodicity or sub set of possible keys that are allowed in a data
   set, may be attached to the data flow definition.

-  **Metadataflow Definition:** A metadata flow definition is very
   similar to a data flow definition, but describes, categorises, and
   constrains metadata sets.

-  **Data Provider:** An organization which produces data or reference
   metadata is termed a data provider.

-  **Provision Agreement:** The set of information which describes the
   way in which data sets and metadata sets are provided by a data
   provider. A provision agreement can be constrained in much the same
   way as a data or metadata flow definition. Thus, a data provider can
   express the fact that it provides a particular data flow covering a
   specific set of countries and topics, Importantly, the actual source
   of registered data or metadata is attached to the provision agreement
   (in terms of a URL). The term "agreement" is used because this
   information can be understood as the basis of a "service-level
   agreement". In SDMX, however, this is informational metadata to
   support the technical systems, as opposed to any sort of contractual
   information (which is outside the scope of a technical
   specification).

-  **Constraint:** Constraints describe a subset of a data source or
   metadata source, and may also provide information about scheduled
   releases of data. They are associated with data providers, provision
   agreements, data flows, metadataflows, data structure definitions and
   metadata structure definitions.

-  **Structure Set:** Structure sets provide a mechanism for grouping
   structural metadata together to form a complete description of the
   relationships between specific, related sets of data and metadata.
   They can be used to map dimensions and attributes to one another, to
   map concepts, to map code lists, and to map category schemes. They
   can be used to describe "cubes" of data, even when the data within
   the cube does not share a single dimensionality.

-  **Reporting Taxonomy:** A reporting taxonomy allows an organisation
   to link (possibly in a hierarchical way) a number of cube or data
   flow definitions which together form a complete "report" of data or
   metadata. This supports primary reporting which often comprises
   multiple cubes of heterogeneous data, but may also support other
   collection and reporting functions. It also supports the
   specification of publications such as a yearbook, in terms of the
   data or metadata contained in the publication.

-  **Process:** The process class provides a way to model statistical
   processes as a set of interconnected *process steps.* Although not
   central to the exchange and dissemination of statistical data and
   metadata, having a shared description of processing allows for the
   interoperable exchange and dissemination of reference metadata sets
   which describe processes-related concepts.

-  **Hierarchical Code List:** This supports the specification of code
   hierarchies. The codes themselves are referenced from the code lists
   in which they are maintained. The Hierarchical Code List thus
   specifies the organisation of the codes in one or more hierarchies,
   but does not define the codes themselves.

**Notes on Data Structuring**

A "cube" is a rich, multi-dimensional construct, which can be viewed
along any of its axes (or "dimensions"). Whilst the full structure of
cube data can be described in SDMX, the actual "data" specification of
SDMX takes a slightly narrower view of these requirements in its version
2.0/2.1 specifications for the purposes of formatting the data for
transmission. The view of data in many SDMX formats is primarily as time
series – that is, as a set of observations which are organized around
the time dimension, so that each observation occurs progressively
through time.

There are, however, many types of statistical data which are not
typically organized for exchange as time series where data are organized
around some other, non-time dimension of the cube – what is often called
"cross-sectional" data. SDMX supports a unified format that represents
in the data set an organisation of the data along any single dimension.
In this context, time series is a particular case of the unified format.

Another type of structure commonly found in statistical "cubes" of data
is the hierarchical classification, used to describe the points along
any of its dimensions (or axes). In the 1.0 version, SDMX standards did
not provide full support for this functionality. The introduction of
these hierarchical classifications is present in the current version of
the standard.

Further, there is support for the expression of functional dependencies
between the various dimensions of a cube, giving support for better
processing of "sparse cubes". This is an aspect of "constraints", which
allow for the framing of a cube region, or for the provision of a set of
valid keys within the total set of keys described by the data structure
definition.

**Notes on Reference Metadata Structuring**

Metadata structures are based on the idea that concepts can be organised
into semantic and presentational hierarchies, and that these hierarchies
can form the basis for the structuring of XML reporting formats. There
are three message types in SDMX-ML which serve this purpose: the
Structure message (providing the metadata structure definition), the
Generic Metadata message (providing a single format for any metadata
structure definition), and the Structure-specific Metadata message
(providing a metadata structure definition-specific format). Typically,
this mechanism is suited to supporting reference metadata reporting and
dissemination.

The Metadata Structure Definition takes *any* concept from concept
schemes, and describes how they can be formed into a reporting or
dissemination structure as metadata attributes – either as a flat list,
or as a hierarchy. The metadata attributes are assigned representations
(coded, textual, etc.) and the number of occurrences. The "target" of
the metadata – that is, the class of process, information, organisation,
exchange, etc. – which is the subject of the metadata is described.
Because the SDMX Information Model gives a formalization of statistical
exchange and dissemination, the model can be used as a typology of the
different actors and resources within statistical activities. Thus, the
"targets" (subjects) of reference metadata sets and metadata flows can
be described as corresponding to some standard class by reference to
this model.

As with data structures, the generic format for metadata sets provides a
known document structure, whilst the structure specific format is
derived specifically from a metadata structure definition and can
perform a higher degree of schema validation.

SDMX Registry Services
----------------------

In order to provide visibility into the large amount of data and
metadata which exists within the SDMX model of statistical exchange, it
is felt that an architecture based on a set of registry services is
potentially useful. A "registry" – as understood in web-services
terminology – is an application which maintains and stores metadata for
querying, and which can be used by any other application in the network
with sufficient access privileges (though note that the mechanism of
access control is outside of the scope of the SDMX standard). It can be
understood as the index of a distributed database or metadata repository
which is made up of all the data provider’s data sets and reference
metadata sets within a statistical community, located across the
Internet or similar network.

Note that the SDMX registry services are not concerned with the storage
of data or reference metadata. The assumption is that data and reference
metadata lives on the sites of its data providers. The SDMX registry
services concern themselves with providing visibility of the data and
reference metadata, and information needed to access the data and
reference metadata. Thus, a registered data set will have its URL
available in the registry, but not the data itself. An application which
wishes to access that data would query the registry, perhaps by drilling
down via a Category Scheme and Dataflow, for the URL of a registered
data source, and then retrieve the data directly from the data provider
(using an SDMX-ML query message or other mechanism).

SDMX does not require a particular technology implementation of the
registry – instead, it specifies the standard interfaces which may be
supported by a registry. Thus, users may implement an SDMX-conformant
registry in any fashion they choose, so long as the interfaces are
supported as specified here. These interfaces are expressed as XML
documents, and form a new part of the SDMX-ML language.

The registry services discussed here can be briefly summarized:

-  **Maintenance of Structural Metadata:** This registry service allows
   users with maintenance agency access privileges to submit and modify
   structural metadata. In this aspect the registry is acting as a
   structural metadata repository. However, it is permissible in an SDMX
   structure to submit just the "stub" of the structural object, such as
   a code list, and for this stub to reference the actual location from
   where the metadata can be retrieved, either from a file or a
   structural metadata resource, such as another registry.

-  **Registration of Data and Metadata Sources:** This registry service
   allows users with maintenance agency access privileges to inform the
   registry of the existence and location (for retrieval) of data sets
   and reference metadata sets. The registry stores metadata about these
   objects, and links it to the structural metadata that give sufficient
   structural information for an application to process it, or for an
   application to discover its existence. Objects in the registry are
   organized and categorized according to one or more category schemes.

-  **Querying:** The registry services have interfaces for querying the
   metadata contained in a registry, so that applications and users can
   discover the existence of data sets and reference metadata sets,
   structural metadata, the providers/agencies associated with those
   objects, and the provider agreements which describe how the data and
   metadata are made available, and how they are categorized.

-  **Subscription/Notification:** It is possible to "subscribe" to
   specific objects in a registry, so that a notification will be sent
   to all subscribers whenever the registry objects are updated.

Web services
------------

Web services allow computer applications to exchange data directly over
the Internet, essentially allowing modular or distributed computing in a
more flexible fashion than ever before. In order to allow web services
to function, however, many standards are required: for requesting and
supplying data; for expressing the enveloping data which is used to
package exchanged data; for describing web services to one another, to
allow for easy integration into applications that use other web services
as data resources.

SDMX provides guidelines for using these standards in a fashion which
will promote interoperability among SDMX web services, and allow for the
creation of generic client applications which will be able to
communicate meaningfully with any SDMX web service which implements
these guidelines.

More specifically, the SDMX web services guidelines offer:

-  A normative interface (WSDL) for SOAP-based web services: The 2.0
   Web-Services Guidelines contained a set of web-services functions,
   but these have been found through implementation to be insufficient
   for the types of SDMX-based web services now being developed.
   Furthermore, the operations and their payload have now become
   normative (WSDL).

-  A normative interface (WADL) for RESTful web services: The RESTful
   API focuses on simplicity. The aim is not to replicate the full
   semantic richness of the SDMX-ML Query message but to make it simple
   to perform a limited set of standard queries. Also, in contrast to
   other parts of the SDMX specification, the RESTful API focuses solely
   on data retrieval (via HTTP GET).

A normative list of common error codes: When web services are used, it
is necessary to have error codes which can help to explain the situation
when problems are encountered. Prior to version 2.1 of the SDMX
standard, there was no set of agreed error codes for use with SDMX web
services. Version 2.1 of the SDMX standard fills that gap.

The SDMX Information Model
==========================

SDMX provides a way of modelling statistical data, and defines the set
of metadata constructs used for this purpose. Because SDMX specifies
formats in two syntaxes for expressing data and structural metadata, the
model is used as a mechanism for guaranteeing that transformation
between the different formats are lossless. All of the formats are
syntax-bound expressions of the common information model. SDMX version
1.0 has based itself on GESMES/TS as an input to the model and formats,
both to build on the proven success of this model for time series data
exchange, and to ensure backward compatibility with existing
GESMES/TS-based systems. Version 2.0/2.1 expands upon the version 1.0
basis to provide a more comprehensive model.

SDMX recognizes that statistical data is structured; in SDMX this
structure is termed a Data Structure Definition. "Data sets" are made up
of one or more lower-level "groups", based on their degrees of
similarity. Each group is in turn comprised of one or more "series" of
data. Each series or section has a "key" - values for each of a cluster
of concepts, also called "dimensions" - which identifies it, and one or
more "observations", which typically combine the time of the
observation, and the value of the observation (e.g., measurement).
Additionally, metadata may be attached at any level of this structure as
descriptive "attributes". Code lists (enumerations) and other patterns
for representation of data and metadata are also modelled.

There is some similarity between "cube" structures commonly used to
process statistical data, and the Data Structure Definition idea in the
SDMX Information Model. It is important to note that the data as
structured according to the SDMX Information Model is optimized for
exchange, potentially with partners who may have no ability to process a
"cube" of data coming from complex statistical systems. SDMX time series
can be understood as "slices" of the cube. Such a slice is identified by
its key. A "series" key consists of the values for all dimensions
specified by the key family except time. It is certainly possible to
reconstruct and describe data cubes from SDMX-structured data, and to
exchange such databases according to the proposed standards. In version
2.0, it becomes possible to more fully describe the structure of cubes,
with hierarchical code lists, constraints, and relationships between
data structure definitions.

In version 2.0/2.1, the SDMX standards also provide a view of reference
metadata: a mechanism for referencing the meaningful "objects" within
the SDMX view of statistical exchange processes (data providers,
structures, provisioning agreements, dataflows, metadata flows, etc.) to
which metadata is attached; a mechanism for describing a set of
meaningful concepts, of organizing them into a presentational structure,
and of indicating how their values are represented. This is based on a
simple, hierarchical view of reference metadata which is common to many
metadata systems and classification/categorization schemes. SDMX
provides a model (and XML formats) for both describing reference
metadata structures, and of reporting reference metadata according to
those structures.

Version 2.0/2.1 also introduces support for metadata related to the
process aspects of statistical exchange. A step-by-step process can be
modelled; information about who is providing data and reference metadata
and how they are providing it can be expressed; and the technical
aspects of service-level agreements (and similar types of provisioning
agreements) can be represented.

The SDMX Information Model formally describes all of the objects listed
above, so as to present a standard view of the statistical exchange
process.

The SDMX Information Model is presented using UML, and is also described
in prose. While the information model is not normative, it is a valuable
tool for understanding and using the normative format specifications.

SDMX-EDI
========

The SDMX-EDI format is drawn from the GESMES/TS version 3.0
implementation guide, as published as a standard of the SDMX initiative.

1. *Statistical Definitions:* An expression of the structural metadata
   covered by the SDMX information model in a UN/EDIFACT format.

2. *Statistical Data:* Optimized for the batch exchange of large amounts
   of time series data between counterparties, it allows for extremely
   compact expression of large whole or partial data sets. Non time
   series data, such as cross-sectional, can be supported if represented
   as repackaged time series, but there is no direct support for
   cross-sectional data in this format.

3. *Data Set List:* a list of data sets and their structural metadata.

The SDMX Information Model provides the constructs which are found in
the EDIFACT syntax used for SDMX-EDI, and those found in the XML syntax
of SDMX-ML. Since both syntactic implementations reflect the same
logical constructs, SDMX-EDI data and structural metadata messages can
be transformed into corresponding SDMX-ML formats, and vice-versa. Thus,
these standards provide for interoperability between the
UN/EDIFACT-based and XML-based systems processing and exchanging
statistical data and metadata.

SDMX-ML
=======

While the SDMX-EDI format is primarily designed to support batch
exchange, SDMX-ML supports a wider range of requirements. XML formats
are used for many different types of automated processing, and thus must
support more varied processing scenarios. That is why there are several
types of messages available as SDMX-ML formats. Each is suited to
support a specific set of processing requirements.

1. *Structure Definition:* All SDMX-ML message types share a common XML
   expression of the metadata needed to understand and process a data
   set or metadata set, and additional metadata about category schemes
   and organisations is included. Also, the structural aspects of data
   and metadata provision – dataflows and metadataflows – are described
   using this format.

2. *Generic Data:* All statistical data expressible in SDMX-ML can be
   marked up according to this data format, in agreement with the
   contents of a Structure Definition message. It is designed for any
   scenario where applications receiving the data need to process it
   according to a single format. Such applications may need independent
   access to the data set's structure before they process it. Data
   marked up in this format are not particularly compact, but they make
   easily available all aspects of the data set. This format does not
   provide strict validation between the data set and its structural
   definition using a generic XML parser. It supports the transmission
   of partial data sets (incremental updates) as well as whole data
   sets. It supports both the time-series and the cross-sectional use
   cases.

3. *Structure-specific Data:* This format is specific to the Data
   Structure Definition of the data set (in other terms, it is
   DSD-specific) and is created by following mappings between the
   metadata constructs defined in the Structure Definition message and
   the technical specification of the format. It supports the exchange
   of large data sets in XML format (typically the size of the data set
   is 50% of the same data expressed as Generic Data), provides strict
   validation of conformance with the DSD using a generic XML parser,
   and supports the transmission of partial data sets (incremental
   updates) as well as whole data sets. The Structure-specific Data
   format specified in SDMX 2.1 supports both the time-series and the
   cross-sectional use cases which were covered by two distinct formats
   in SDMX 2.0.

..

   Many XML tools and technologies have expectations about the functions
   performed by an XML schema, one of which is a very direct
   relationship between the XML constructs described in the XML schema
   and the tagged data in the XML instance. Strong data typing is also
   considered normal, supporting full validation of the tagged data.
   These message types are designed to support validation and other
   expected XML schema functions.

4. *Generic Metadata:* All reference metadata expressible in SDMX-ML
   format can be marked up according to this schema. It performs only a
   minimum of validation, and is somewhat verbose, but it does support
   the creation of generic software tools and services for processing
   reference metadata.

5. *Structure-specific Metadata:* For each metadata structure
   definition, an XML schema specific to that structure can be created,
   to perform validation on sets of reported metadata. This structure is
   less verbose than the Generic Metadata format, and, because the XML
   mark-up relates directly to the reported concepts, it is appropriate
   for applications that are designed to process a specific type of
   metadata report. It is analogous to the Structure-specific Data
   format for data in its approach to the use of XML.

6. *Query:* Data and metadata are often published in databases which are
   available on the web. Thus, it is necessary to have a standard query
   document which allows the databases to be queried, and return an
   SDMX-ML data, reference metadata, or structure message. The Query
   document is an implementation of the SDMX Information Model for use
   in web services and database-driven applications, allowing for a
   standard request to be sent to data providers using these
   technologies.

7. *Registry:* All of the possible interactions with the SDMX registry
   services are supported using SDMX-ML interfaces. All but one of these
   documents are based on a synchronous exchange of documents – a
   "request" message answered by a "response" message. There are two
   basic types of request – a "Submit", which writes metadata to the
   registry services, and a "Query", which is used to discover that
   metadata. Registry interactions provide formats for all types of
   provisioning metadata, as well as for subscription/notification,
   structural metadata, and data and metadata registration. The
   exception is the (Registry) notification message which is
   asynchronous.

Because all of the SDMX-ML formats are implementations of the same
information model, and all the data and metadata messages are derivable
from the Structure message which describes a data set or metadata set,
it is possible to have standard mappings between each of the similar
formats. These mappings can be implemented in generic transformation
tools, useful to all SDMX-ML users, and not specific to a particular
data set’s key family or metadata set’s structure definition (even
though some of the formats they deal with may be). Part of the SDMX-ML
package is the set of mappings between the structure-specific data and
metadata formats and the Structure Definition format from which all are
derivable.

Conformance
===========

This section will contain a normative statement of what applications
must do to be considered conformant with the SDMX version 2.1
specifications. This will address both the application functionality
that must be supported, and the contents of an Implementer’s Conformance
Statement regarding SDMX conformance.

Dependencies on SDMX content-oriented guidelines
================================================

The technical standards proposed here are designed so that they can be
used in conjunction with other SDMX guidelines which are more closely
tied to the content and semantics of statistical data exchange. The SDMX
Information Model works equally well with any statistical concept, but
to encourage interoperability, it is also necessary to standardize and
harmonize the use of specific concepts and terminology. To achieve this
goal, SDMX creates and maintains guidelines for cross-domain concepts,
terminology, and structural definitions. There are three major parts to
this effort.

Cross-Domain Concepts
---------------------

The SDMX Cross-Domain Concepts is a content guideline concerning
concepts which are used across statistical domains. This list is
expected to grow and to be subject to revision as SDMX is used in a
growing number of domains. The use of the SDMX Cross-Domain Concepts,
where appropriate, provides a framework to further promote
interoperability among organisations using the technical standards
presented here. The harmonization of statistical concepts includes not
only the definitions of the concepts, and their names, but also, where
appropriate, their representation with standard code lists, and the role
they play within data structure definitions and metadata structure
definitions.

The intent of this guideline is two-fold: to provide a core set of
concepts which can be used to structure statistical data and metadata,
to promote interoperability between systems ("structural metadata", as
described above); and to promote the exchange of metadata more widely,
with a set of harmonized concept names and definitions for other types
of metadata ("reference metadata", as defined above.)

Metadata Common Vocabulary
--------------------------

The Metadata Common Vocabulary is an SDMX guideline which provides
definition of terms to be used for the comparison and mapping of
terminology found in data structure definitions and in other aspects of
statistical metadata management. Essentially, it provides ISO-compliant
definitions for a wide range of statistical terms, which may be used
directly, or against which other terminology systems may be mapped. This
set of terms is inclusive of the terminology used within the SDMX
Technical Standards.

The MCV provides definitions for terms on which the SDMX Cross-Domain
Metadata Concepts work is built.

Statistical Subject-Matter Domains
----------------------------------

The Statistical Subject-Matter Domains is a listing of the breadth of
statistical information for the purposes of organizing widespread
statistical exchange and categorization. It acts as a standard scheme
against which the categorization schemes of various counterparties can
be mapped, to facilitate interoperable data and metadata exchange. It
serves another useful purpose, however, which is to allow an
organization of corresponding "domain groups", each of which could
define standard data structure definitions, concepts, etc. within their
domains. Such groups already exist within the international community.
SDMX would use the Statistical Subject-Matter Domains list to facilitate
the efforts of these groups to develop the kinds of content standards
which could support the interoperation of SDMX-conformant technical
systems within and across statistical domains. The organisation of the
content of such schemes is supported in SDMX as a Category Scheme.

SDMX Statistical Subject-Matter Domains will be listed and maintained by
the SDMX Initiative and will be subject to adjustment.

Looking Forward
===============

The SDMX initiative sees this set of data and metadata formats and
registry services interfaces standards as useful in creating more
efficient and open systems for statistical exchange. It is anticipated
that SDMX will refine these standards further as they are implemented,
so as to build on the interoperability enabled by having a set of
standard formats and exchanges based on a common information model.

The review process for version 2.0 and 2.1 has suggested that future
work should take advantage of a wider participation of the SDMX user
community (statistical offices, central banks and other national and
international organisations dealing with statistics) in further
enhancing the Technical Standards and improving its use.
