SDMX Standards: Section 3A

SDMX-ML:

Schema and Documentation

Version 2.1

April 2011

© SDMX 2011

http://www.sdmx.org/

Contents
========

`1 BACKGROUND 1 <#background>`__

`1.1 History and Version 2.0/2.1 Developments
1 <#history-and-version-2.02.1-developments>`__

`1.2 The XML Design 1 <#the-xml-design>`__

`1.3 Fostering the Use of a Standard SDMX-ML
2 <#fostering-the-use-of-a-standard-sdmx-ml>`__

`2 NORMATIVE REFERENCES 2 <#normative-references>`__

`3 CONFORMANCE 2 <#conformance>`__

`4 DESIGN OVERVIEW 2 <#design-overview>`__

`4.1 Scope and Requirements 2 <#scope-and-requirements>`__

`4.2 Design Approach 4 <#design-approach>`__

`4.3 SDMX-ML Packaging: Namespace Modules
5 <#sdmx-ml-packaging-namespace-modules>`__

`5 RELTATED DOCUMENTS 7 <#reltated-documents>`__

BACKGROUND
==========

History and Version 2.0/2.1 Developments
----------------------------------------

The SDMX Technical Standards Version 1.0 established an information
model which described aggregated statistical data sets and the
structural metadata needed to exchange them in a standard fashion. This
drew on the earlier example of the GESMES/TS standard. Based on the SDMX
information model, several formats were developed: XML formats for
exchange of structural metadata, data sets, and queries for these
(SDMX-ML), and EDIFACT formats for the structural metadata and data sets
(SDMX-EDI). These standards supported a number of exchange patterns,
characterized as "bilateral", "gateway", and "data-sharing" models, as
described in the Framework document in the Version 1.0 standards
package.

Versions 2.0 and 2.1 build on this foundation to provide a higher degree
of support for all of these models, with an emphasis on data sharing in
the form of a set of standard registry services interfaces. It has also
expanded to include support for new types of metadata exchange and
reporting, with a focus on "reference metadata" concerned with quality,
methodology, and other issues. Further, the ability to provide metadata
about the relationships between data sets and structures has been
expanded, providing more support for data cubes. Finally, experience has
shown that some minor additions to the existing structural metadata and
dataset structures will allow SDMX to support more different types of
statistical information.

The scope of the Version 2.1 SDMX Technical Standards is thus much
broader, and is accompanied by a larger set of message types in the
SDMX-ML formats. While the XML formats described here have grown in
number and scope, the EDI formats remain relatively unchanged.

The XML Design
--------------

All of these document types will share a common "envelope" at the
message level ("SDMXMessage.xsd"), as well as a set of common low-level
components (“SDMXCommon[subset].xsd”) so that header information and
basic structure of a message will always be the same.

-  Schema and sub-modules for describing all types of structural
   metadata – for data sets (data structure definitions), for metadata
   sets (metadata structure definitions), for related groups of metadata
   and data structures, and for all types of structural objects involved
   in registry-based exchanges ("SDMXStructure[*subset*].xsd")

-  Generic data schema for data-sharing exchange
   ("SDMXDataGeneric[*subset*].xsd")

-  Structure specific data schema for for updates, revisions/bilateral
   exchange ("SDMXDataStructured[*subset*].xsd")

-  Generic query schema and sub-modules for invoking web services
   ("SDMXQuery[*subset*].xsd")

-  Generic schema and sub-modules for registry interfaces (“SDMXRegistry
   [*subset*].xsd”)

-  Generic schema for reference metadata sets
   (“SDMXMetadataGeneric.xsd”)

-  Metadata-structure-definition-specific schema for metadata sets
   (“SDMXMetadataStructured.xsd”)

Fostering the Use of a Standard SDMX-ML
---------------------------------------

In addition to these different formats, standard mappings and
corresponding transformation tools have been developed for the creation
of data structure-specific schemas from structure descriptions, to
transform XML data instances from one XML data description format to
another, and from these formats into the corresponding SDMX-ML messages.
This level of free tools support will foster the early use of SDMX and
permit the data to be easily used across all processes, which is
otherwise a difficult requirement to meet. Ultimately, it is the fact
that all formats share a common information model that enables this
approach to meet the wide set of SDMX requirements.

NORMATIVE REFERENCES
====================

W3C XML Schema Definition Language, version 1.0 (URL:
http://www.w3c.org/XML/Schema#dev), World Wide Web Consortium

W3C Extensible Markup Language, version 1.0, Third Edition (URL:
http://www.w3c.org/TR/2004/REC-xml-20040204/), World Wide Web Consortium

CONFORMANCE
===========

Part IV (SDMX_2_1_SECTION_03A_PART_IV_DATA) of this document is
normative, providing rules for the creation of conformant SDMX-ML XML
instances and W3C XML Schemas.

DESIGN OVERVIEW
===============

Scope and Requirements
----------------------

To understand the relationships between the several document types, it
is important to have some familiarity with the requirements they are
designed to fulfil.

-  Large amounts of data must be captured in a reasonably compact
   format, because of the potential size of databases being exchanged.

-  It must be possible to send incremental updates, rather than entire,
   complete databases. The validation of such exchanges demands not that
   an entire data set be exchanged, but only that enough information be
   sent to ensure accurate updating and revision processes.

-  Structural information as well as data will need to be transmitted.

-  There must be a reliable transformation to and from the GESMES/TS
   EDIFACT syntax.

-  It should be possible to present natural-language information in
   multiple, equivalent languages.

-  To support web services and similar technological approaches, there
   is a requirement to send queries to information sources as well as
   data and structures.

-  Users (and registry services) may not know about a specific data
   structure, and will need to be able to handle data across data
   structures, and even (for, say, a comparison service) to put data
   structured according to multiple data structures in a single XML
   instance.

-  The XML should conform to the Information Model as closely as
   possible, and promote simple mapping from the XML instances to model
   based objects

-  The XML should behave as “normally” as possible within standard XML
   tools such as web development environments, parsers, guided editing
   tools, etc.

-  Data should be able to be structured in one or two levels, with the
   two level format allowing for a single dimension which serves to
   disambitguate the observations. In addtion, it should still be
   possible to restrict this more generalized structure to time series
   only formats. However, doing so should not add any additional burden
   in terms of how data is processed.

-  Data structure and metadata structure specific formats should be able
   to be generically processed, without having to understand the entire
   structure; which is to say that the structure-specific schemas should
   serve to validate the information, but not be required to process it.

-  XML formats should promote re-use of common semantics, concepts, and
   codelists to the greatest possible extent, while still recognizing
   the agency which maintains a specific resource (a codelist, a data
   structure, a data set, etc.)

-  XML formats must support interactions of applications with standard
   registry services, based on standard interfaces. These must function
   both as web services, and as services operating over http and similar
   protocols.

-  XML formats must support the reporting of reference metadata which is
   not structural in nature, but which constitutes a primary information
   flow of metadata attached to other parts of the statistical
   collection, reporting, processing, exchange, and dissemination.
   Quality initiatives, methodological metadata, administrative
   metadata, and similar types of metadata reporting must be supported,
   and must be user-configurable.

-  XML formats for describing the relationships between groups of
   metadata sets and data sets, by mapping concepts and codelists
   between these structures, and by allowing for common querying of data
   and metadata described with not only a single structural definition,
   but with a related set of structural definitions, based on these
   mappings.

-  Allow for time-related concepts which are not related to the time of
   the observation to be used in data structures.

-  Allow for simple, un-coded incremental identifiers in data structure
   definitions, to be used to dis-ambiguate data series/observations
   which do not have a simple 1-to-1 relationship with the time period
   of the observation.

-  Allow for un-coded identifiers and descriptors to be associated with
   data structure definitions which establish an external entity or
   identifier to disambiguate between otherwise identical
   series/observations (ie, when a data set describes a group of
   organisations, or a set of accounts, which might otherwise have
   identical key values).

-  Allow for non-numeric observation values (usually but not always
   coded)

-  Allow “cube”-based systems (such as OLAP) to interoperate with less
   sophisticated systems, without necessarily losing the richness of
   metadata found in the more sophisticated systems.

This is a very broad set of requirements, and in examining these it
becomes evident that some of the requirements are very much at
cross-purposes. It is almost impossible to design a single XML document
type for any single function (exchange of data, exchange of reference
metadata, querying, etc.) which will satisfy all of these requirements.
At the same time, it was very much felt that whatever design was adopted
should have a clear relationship with the information model.

Design Approach
---------------

The basic design for the XML Schema started with the information model.
Just as the model does, the structural metadata objects are built up
from the abstract classes on which they are based. This approach means
that more advanced XML tools that understand such inheritance can use
thes constructs to more easily deserialize the XML instances into object
based on the models.

Another fundamental approach was to make constructs as consistent as
possible so that tools built to process the XML could make use of reuse.
This approach extends not only to the basic information model properties
such as identificaitons and version, but also to areas such as
referencing and query messages.

Through the years of the standard, it was identified that users
typically implemented on the previously named CompactData message and/or
the GenericData message. It was determined that the UtilityData message
was rarely used,and the CrossSectionalData message was used, but often
in inconsistent manners due to the ambiguity in its definition.
Therefore, the apporoach for this verison was to harmonize these data
formats as much as possible. The result is two basic data formats; a
generic format and a data structure definition specific format. As much
as possible these formats have been structured so that they are very
similar in structure. In addition to the harmonisation of the generic
and structure specific data formats, the requirements of the CompactData
and CrossSectionalData messages have been combined into one format. This
format is now flexible in that it allows for any single dimension to
exist at the observation. In order to accomodate existing applications
that did only use the CompactData message due to its time series
orientation, time series only variations of the structure specific and
generic data messages have been created. Care was taken to ensure that
these time series only variations could be processed just as the general
format counterparts are so as to introduce no additional requirements.

These same principles were applied to the reference metadata messages as
well. In addition, the base structure specific schemas from which data
and metadata structure specific variations are created, have been
structured so that they enforce a specific structure and can be easily
processed in a generic mannner.

Another new approach that has been introduced in this version is to
remove some of the generalities from the messages that existed to allow
for web services to be more specific as to the contract of their
functions. As opposed to have a single query message that can accomodate
any structural metadata query and data and reference metadata queries
serving as the input into a codelist query function­­–a specific message
is created that only allows for what a codelist query should reasonably
be expected to handle.

SDMX-ML Packaging: Namespace Modules
------------------------------------

In the proposed XML Schema design, there is a packaging scheme based on
the idea that XML namespaces can be used as “modules”, so that any given
user or application need only be familiar with a subset of the entire
library in order to use it. This approach fit very well with the design
described above, and is often used in major XML standards for other
domains.

The other major benefit of namespaces – especially in light of the
requirement that maintenance agencies be tracked across the potential
reuse of the structures and data they maintained – is that it allows
SDMX to own certain namespace modules, and allows other maintenance
agencies to own namespaces specific to the key-families or metadata
structure definitions they also maintain.

The result is a set of namespace packages which agree with the design
approach described above. Some large schemas are divided into
sub-modules, all within the same namespace, for ease of use. Each module
or sub-module is a single instance of the W3C XML Schema Language’s
schema element, associated with the apropriate XML namespace. Where
these modules and sub-modules have dependencies on one another, they use
the XML Schema importing mechanism to draw on constructs described in
another module or sub-module. Further, the namespces themselves reflect
a sort of relationsip. For example, all data constructs are in a
namespace based on
http://www.sdmx.org/resources/sdmxml/schemas/v2_1/data. These
relationships in the namespace are meant to reflect the relationship of
the constructs.

-  An SDMX Namespace Module containing the common message constructs,
   including the common header information (“SDMXMessage.xsd”) - uses
   all other SDMX-ML namespace modules

-  An SDMX Namespace Module containing the message footer constructs,
   including the common header information (“SDMXMessageFooter.xsd”) -
   used only by the message namespace.

-  An SDMX Namespace Module containing the descriptions of structural
   metadata such as key families, concepts, and codelists
   (“SDMXStructure [*sub-module*].xsd”)

-  An SDMX Namespace Module containing constructs shared in common
   across all of the SDMX message types (“SDMXCommon[*sub-module*].xsd”)
   – needed for all other SDMX-ML namespace modules (also included for
   convenience is the XML namespace [“xml.xsd”] provided by the W3C for
   including the xml:lang attribute in schemas).

-  An SDMX Namespace Module describing the generic (non-data
   structure-specific) format for formatting data
   (“SDMXDataGeneric.xsd”)

-  An SDMX Namespace Module for structured (data structure-specific)
   data (“SDMXDataStructured.xsd”)

-  An SDMX Namespace Module for describing the structure of the generic
   query message (“SDMXQuery[*sub-module*].xsd”) – for web services
   developers and users, etc.

-  A set of namespaced modules created and maintained by those who
   create data structure-specific schemas – not maintained by SDMX

-  An SDMX Namespace Module providing a generic format for reporting of
   reference metadata, regardless of metadata structure definition
   (“SDMXMetadataGeneric.xsd”).

-  An SDMX Namespace Module providing the common framework to be used
   for all metadata-structure-specific schemas for reference metadata
   reporting (“SDMXMetadataStructured.xsd”).

-  A set of namespaced modules created and maintained by those who
   create metadata-structure-specific “Metadata Report” schemas – not
   maintained by SDMX.

-  An SDMX Namespace Module providing standard interfaces for
   interactions with a set of registry services
   (“SDMXRegistry[*sub-module*].xsd”).

The following sections describe in detail the proposed XML formats,
which should be examined alongside the documentation provided. These
proposed schemas are divided into the generic schemas, for which a
complete set of schema definitions can be provided, and data
structure-specific schemas, for which a core structure is provided (with
schema code), plus a guide to how a specific data structure or metadata
structure definition can be mapped onto the core structure.

RELTATED DOCUMENTS
==================

To all for more managable doucments, the remainder of this document has
been divided into seven different parts, each a separate document. These
parts are as follows:

1. SDMX_2_1_SECTION_03A_PART_I_MESSAGE: This contains the description of
   the message namespaces schemas

2. SDMX_2_1_SECTION_03A_PART_II_COMMON: This details the common
   namespace schemas

3. SDMX_2_1_SECTION_03A_PART_III_STRUCTURE: This details the structure
   namespace (structural metadata) schemas

4. SDMX_2_1_SECTION_03A_PART_IV_DATA: This details the data and metadata
   namespaces, as well as detailing the rules for creating strucutre
   specific schemas

5. SDMX_2_1_SECTION_03A_PART_V_QUERY: This details the query namespace
   schemas

6. SDMX_2_1_SECTION_03A_PART_VI_REGISTRY: This details the registry
   namespace schemas

7. SDMX_2_1_SECTION_03A_PART_VII_SAMPLES: This provides a brief
   explanation of the currently available sample files.
